
This is the README file for Planner.

Synopsis
========

Planner is an organizer and day planner for Emacs.  It helps you keep
track of your pending and completed tasks, daily schedule, dates to
remember, notes and inspirations.  It is a powerful tool not only for
managing your time and productivity, but also for keeping within easy
keystroke reach all of the information you need to be productive.  It
can even publish reports charting your work for your personal web
page, your conscience, or your soon-to-be-impressed boss.

In fact, because it uses as its building blocks simple plain-text
files, it is an incredibly modular and flexible tool capable of
shaping and handling your personal information in ways whose variety
is limited only by your imagination.  Because of this, Planner has a
very active and generous community who regularly share their
innovations with each other.  Many of these modules and extensions are
included.

License
=======

Planner is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option) any
later version.

Planner is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with Planner; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free
Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA
02110-1301, USA.

Directory contents
==================

The directory structure is as follows.

top level :: Planner source code and the documentation
             (planner-el.texi).

contrib :: Files that are not a part of Planner proper, but are useful
           enough to be bundled with Planner.

scripts :: Scripts that are used when compiling Planner.

Getting started
===============

Compilation
-----------

This is an optional step, since Emacs Lisp source code does not
necessarily have to be byte-compiled.  It will yield a speed increase,
though.

A working copy of Emacs or XEmacs is needed in order to compile
Planner.  By default, the program that is installed with the name
`emacs' will be used.

You will also need to have Emacs Muse 3.03 or later installed.  See
http://emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/PlannerModeQuickStart for current
information on which release of Muse to get,

If Muse is not present in the `~/elisp/muse' directory on your system,
you will have to change the line that mentions Muse in
`scripts/planner-build.el' to something like the following, replacing
PATH with the path to Muse.

(add-to-list 'load-path "PATH/lisp")

If you want to use the `xemacs' binary to perform the compilation, you
must copy `Makefile.defs.default' to `Makefile.defs' in the top-level
directory, and then edit `Makefile.defs' as follows.  You can put
either a full path to an Emacs or XEmacs binary or just the command
name, as long as it is in the PATH.  Depending on your setup, changes
to the PREFIX, ELISPDIR, and/or INFODIR variables may also need to be
made.

EMACS    = xemacs
SITEFLAG = -no-site-file
# Edit the section as necessary
install_info = install-info --section "XEmacs 21.4" $(1).info \
        $(INFODIR)/dir || :

In order for Planner to be byte-compiled properly, you will need to
specify the paths to Muse and other external software programs in
`scripts/planner-build.el'.  If a file fails to be byte-compiled, only
its source will be installed.

Running `make' should compile the Planner source files in the `lisp'
directory.

Installation
------------

Planner may be installed into your file hierarchy by doing the
following.

Copy `Makefile.defs.default' to `Makefile.defs' in the top-level
directory, if you haven't done so already.  Then edit the
`Makefile.defs' file so that ELISPDIR points to where you want the
source and compiled Muse files to be installed and INFODIR indicates
where to put the Muse manual.  As mentioned earlier, you will want to
edit EMACS and SITEFLAG as shown in the Compilation section if you are
using XEmacs.

If you are installing Planner on a Debian system, you might want to
change the value of INSTALLINFO as specified in `Makefile.defs'.

If you wish to install Planner to different locations than the
defaults specify, edit `Makefile.defs' accordingly.

Run `make' as a normal user.

Run `make install' as the root user if you have chosen installation
locations that require this.

Insinuation
-----------

Two things need to happen in order for Planner to be usable with your
version of Emacs or XEmacs.

 1. The location of the Planner directory needs to be added to the load
    path so that your variant of Emacs can find it.

 2. You need to load whichever Planner files you wish to make use of.

A quick example that accomplishes both of these follows.

;; Add this to your .emacs or .xemacs/init.el file.
(add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/planner")
(require 'planner)

Documentation
-------------

The Planner manual may be generated by running `make doc'.

It will produce two files: an Info file called `planner-el.info' and
an HTML document called `planner-el.html'.

This manual is also available online in several forms at
http://www.wjsullivan.net/static/doc/planner/.

Further Documentation
=====================

The maintainer of Planner has a webpage for it at
http://www.wjsullivan.net/PlannerMode.html.

Bugs may be reported using the Planner Bug-Tracker at
https://gna.org/bugs/?group=planner-el.

Planner has a collaborative wiki at
http://emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/PlannerMode.

Mailing lists for Planner and some related software exists; consult
https://gna.org/mail/?group=planner-el for details on joining them or
viewing their contents.
