
== Verdi version before 201001 ==
=== ModelSim (6.1 or Later Versions) - Verilog Only ===

The Novas object file for FSDB dumping supports signal dumping in pure 
Verilog designs with [[../msim][ModelSim]]. To dump Verilog signals to the FSDB files, you 
can use the FSDB dumping commands at the vsim prompt or in the Verilog code.

The related files for FSDB dumping of pure Verilog designs with [[../msim][ModelSim]] are 
in the *<NOVAS_INST_DIR>/share/PLI/modelsim_pli??/${PLATFORM}* directory 
(the ?? varies for different versions). The FSDB dumper is a shared library 
file called _libpli.so_. You have to load it in _vsim_ when running the [[../msim][ModelSim]] simulation.

==== Linking Novas Object Files ====
For vsim to load the FSDB dumper, run the following steps.

===== Specify Shared Library Search Path =====
Set the system shared library search path to include the directory of the Novas 
object file for FSDB dumping ([[../msim][ModelSim]] 6.0 is used as an example).

*Solaris/Linux Platforms*

`> setenv LD_LIBRARY_PATH ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/modelsim_pli61/${PLATFORM}:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`

*IBM Platforms*

`> setenv SHLIB_PATH ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/modelsim_pli61/${PLATFORM}:$SHLIB_PATH`

*NOTE*: Do not load the libpli.so (the FSDB dumper for pure Verilog designs) and 
*novas_fli.so* (the FSDB dumper for Mixed-HDL/VHDL designs) files simultaneously 
when running a [[../msim][ModelSim]] simulation. Therefore, if you are dumping pure Verilog 
designs, point LD_LIBRARY_PATH to the libpli.so file and if you are dumping 
mixed-language designs, point LD_LIBRARY_PATH to the novas_fli.so file.

===== Compile and Include Novas FSDB Dumping Commands =====

This is optional; however, if you want to invoke FSDB dumping commands at the 
vsim prompt, or run the [[../msim][ModelSim]] simulation using interactive mode in Novas, 
you must compile the novas_vlog.v file into the design library. You can find 
this Verilog file in the <NOVAS_INST_DIR>/share/PLI/modelsim_pli??/${PLATFORM} directory.

{{{
> vlog -work your_working_lib \
${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/modelsim_pli61/${PLATFORM}/
novas_vlog.v
}}}

===== Load the FSDB Dumper =====
There are three methods to load the FSDB dumper libpli.so (or libpli.sl) into 
vsim during simulation.
  - *Method 1: -pli Option*
Use the -pli option with vsim. For example:
    * *Solaris/Linux Platforms*
`> vsim -pli libpli.so novas_vlog top ...`
    * *IBM Platforms*
`> vsim -pli libpli.sl novas_vlog top ...`

  - *Method 2: veriuser Entry*
Set the veriuser entry in the _modelsim.ini_ file. For example:
    # *Solaris/Linux Platforms*
{{{
[vsim]
...
veriuser=libpli.so
}}}

    # *IBM Platforms*
{{{
[vsim]
...
veriuser=libpli.sl
}}}

  - *Method 3: PLIOBJS Environment Variable*
Set the PLIOBJS system environment variable before running vsim. For example:

    - *Solaris/Linux Platforms*

`> setenv PLIOBJS "libpli.so"`

    - *IBM Platforms*

`> setenv PLIOBJS "libpli.sl"`

If you want to invoke FSDB dumping commands at the vsim prompt, or run the 
[[../msim][ModelSim]] simulation using interactive mode in Novas, you must Compile and 
Include Novas FSDB Dumping Commands to compile novas_vlog.v into the 
design library. Then specify novas_vlog as one of the top-level modules when 
running vsim. For example:

*Solaris/Linux Platforms*

`> vsim -pli libpli.so -lib your_working_lib novas_vlog top ...`

*IBM Platforms*

`> vsim -pli libpli.sl -lib your_working_lib novas_vlog top ...`

When running interactive mode in Novas, you can also specify novas_vlog in the 
Options field on the Simulation page of the Preferences form (invoked from 
_nTrace_ under _Tools -> Preferences_).


== Verdi version after 201001 ==

*NOTE*: A *novas_dump.log* file gets created during simulation to record some essential 
simulation/dumping information, such as simulation options used, environment variable 
settings, and Novas object directories linked. This log file is needed to report a new 
unified dumper related issue effectively.

=== ModelSim (6.4 or later version) ===
The Novas object file for FSDB dumping supports signal dumping in pure Verilog 
designs with [[../msim][ModelSim]]. To dump Verilog signals to the FSDB files, you can 
use the FSDB dumping commands at the vsim prompt or in the Verilog code.

The related files for FSDB dumping of pure Verilog designs with [[../msim][ModelSim]] are in 
the *<NOVAS_INST_DIR>/share/PLI/MODELSIM/${PLATFORM}* directory. The FSDB dumper 
is a shared library file called novas_fli.so. It has to be loaded in _vsim_ when 
running the [[../msim][ModelSim]] simulation.

To link the Novas object files for FSDB dumping with [[../msim][ModelSim]], specify the shared 
library path and then load the FSDB dumper.

==== Specify Shared Library Search Path ====
Set the system shared library search path to include the directory of the Novas 
object file for FSDB dumping.

*Solaris/Linux Platforms*

`> setenv LD_LIBRARY_PATH ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/MODELSIM/${PLATFORM}: $LD_LIBRARY_PATH`

==== Load the FSDB Dumper ====
There are three methods to load the FSDB dumper novas_fli.so into vsim during simulation.

   * *Method 1: -pli Option*
Use the -pli option with vsim. For example:

*Solaris/Linux Platforms*

`> vsim -pli novas_fli.so top ...`

   * *Method 2: veriuser Entry*
Set the veriuser entry in the _modelsim.ini_ file. For example:

*Solaris/Linux Platforms*
{{{
[vsim]
...
veriuser=novas_fli.so
}}}

   * *Method 3: PLIOBJS Environment Variable*
Set the PLIOBJS system environment variable before running vsim. For example:

*Solaris/Linux Platforms*

`> setenv PLIOBJS "novas_fli.so" `

When the linking is successful, a Novas banner will be shown to indicate the 
coordinating FSDB dumper engine is loading; otherwise, a failed to load message 
is shown instead.

*Succeeds:*
     *Novas* Loading libssocre_mtiXXX.so
*Fails:*
     *Novas* Failed to load FSDB dumper.
