
== Verdi version before 201001 ==

=== VCS (2006.06 or Later Versions) ===

You can only statically link the Novas object file for FSDB dumping with VCS for 
pure Verilog designs. You must specify the PLI table file and the library file of 
the FSDB dumper when using vcs to compile the design.

==== Manually Linking the Version-specific Novas Object Files ====

To support new functions in different versions of *VCS*, there are several _vcs_ prefix 
sub-directories under the *<NOVAS_INST_DIR>/share/PLI* directory.  Each directory 
supports a specific version of VCS and later versions. You must link the FSDB dumper 
for a VCS version that is closest to the version of VCS you are using.

*NOTE*: Do not link the Novas object file for FSDB dumping that supports a newer 
VCS version than the one you are using.

The VCS command line option _-line_ is optional. It is used to turn on the VCS 
line-debugging mode. It must be included if you want to set line break points 
or run the design step by step using interactive mode in Novas.

For example, if you are using VCS 2006.06, you must link the FSDB dumper under 
*<NOVAS_INST_DIR>/share/PLI/vcs2006.06*:

{{{
> vcs -line -P ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/vcs2006.06/
${PLATFORM}/novas.tab \
${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/vcs2006.06/${PLATFORM}/pli.a design.v 
}}}

The table file, _novas.tab_, contains the definitions of the FSDB dumping commands.

The archive file, _pli.a_, is the library file of the FSDB dumper.

*NOTE*: The _novas.tab_ file associated with the command line option -P must be 
the most recently updated file that came with _pli.a_.

==== Automatically Linking the Version-specific Novas Object Files ====

On Solaris or Linux platforms, you can automatically link the correct version 
specific Novas object files for FSDB dumping regardless of the VCS version you 
are running. You must first set the *VERDI_HOME* system environment variable to 
the root directory of the Verdi installation you are running. For example,
`> setenv VERDI_HOME /tools/verdi/verdi2009.01`

Specify the common table file, fsdb_vcs.tab, and common library file, *fsdb_vcs.a*, 
under the *${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcs/{$PLATFORM}/* directory when using vcs or 
vcsi to compile the design. For example,

*Solaris Platforms*
{{{
> vcs -line +cli+3 \
      -P ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcs/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcs.tab \
      ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcs/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcs.a \
      design.v
}}}

*Linux Platforms*
{{{
> vcs -line +cli+3 -LDFLAGS -rdynamic \
      -P ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcs/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcs.tab \
      ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcs/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcs.a \
      design.v
}}}

*NOTE*: On Linux, you must also include the additional _-LDFLAGS_ _-rdynamic_ options with the vcs compiler.

The FSDB dumper will automatically load the correct dumper kernel library libfsdb_core.so 
from the sub-directory $VERDI_HOME points to and according to the VCS version 
and the platform you are running.

Alternatively, you can set the FSDB_DUMPER_PATH system environment variable to 
the full directory of a specific FSDB dumper (for example, in case you receive 
a patch dumper from Novas). For example,

`> setenv FSDB_DUMPER_PATH /tools/verdi/verdi2009.01/share/PLI/vcs200606/LINUX`

The FSDB dumper will always load the dumper kernel library libfsdb_core.so from 
the directory FSDB_DUMPER_PATH points to.


=== VCS Direct Kernel Interface (2006.06 or Later Versions) ===

VCS Direct Kernel Interface (DKI) is a dumping interface that is only specific 
to VCS. The DKI-based Novas object file for FSDB dumping employs this interface 
to speed up dumping. Some FSDB dumping commands for SystemVerilog design dumping 
are only available in the DKI-based Novas object files for FSDB dumping.

You can only statically link the DKI-based Novas object file for FSDB dumping 
with VCS for pure Verilog designs. You have to specify the PLI table file and 
the library file of the FSDB dumper when using vcsd to compile the design.

==== Manually Linking the Version-specific Novas Object Files ====

To support new functions in different versions of VCS, there are several vcsd 
prefix sub-directories under the <NOVAS_INST_DIR>/share/PLI directory.  Each 
directory supports a specific version of VCS and later versions. You must 
link the DKI-based FSDB dumper for a VCS version that is closest to the version 
of VCS you are using.

*NOTE*: Do not link the DKI-based Novas object file for FSDB dumping that supports 
a newer VCS version than the one you are using.

You also need to include the +vcsd option with the vcs compiler to enable the DKI 
interface. The VCS command line options -line and +cli+3 are optional.  They are 
used to turn on the VCS line-debugging mode and the command-line interactive mode. 
They must be included if you want to run the VCS DKI simulation using interactive 
mode in Novas.

For example, if you are using VCS 2006.06, you must link the DKI-based FSDB dumper 
under <NOVAS_INST_DIR>/share/PLI/vcsd2006.06:
{{{
> vcs +vcsd \
      -P ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/vcsd2006.06/${PLATFORM}/
      vcsd.tab \
      ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/vcsd2006.06/${PLATFORM}/pli.a \
      design.v
}}}

The table file, _vcsd.tab_, contains the definitions of the DKI-based FSDB dumping 
commands. The archive file, pli.a, is the library file of the FSDB dumper.

*NOTE*: The vcsd.tab file associated with the command line option -P must be the 
most recently updated file that came with pli.a.

==== Automatically Linking the Version-specific Novas Object Files ====

On Solaris or Linux platforms, you can automatically link the correct version 
specific Novas object files for FSDB dumping regardless of the VCS version you 
are running. You must first set the VERDI_HOME system environment variable to 
the root directory of the Verdi installation you are running. For example,

`> setenv VERDI_HOME /tools/verdi/verdi2009.01`

Specify the common table file, fsdb_vcsd.tab, and the common library file, 
*fsdb_vcsd.a*, under the ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcsd/{$PLATFORM}/ directory 
when using vcs or vcsi to compile the design. For example,

*Solaris Platforms*
{{{
> vcs +vcsd \
      -P ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcsd/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcsd.tab \
      ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcsd/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcsd.a \
      design.v
}}}

*Linux Platforms*
{{{
> vcs +vcsd -LDFLAGS -rdynamic \
      -P ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcsd/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcsd.tab \
      ${VERDI_HOME}/share/PLI/vcsd/${PLATFORM}/fsdb_vcsd.a \
      design.v
}}}

*NOTE*: On Linux, you must also include the additional -LDFLAGS -rdynamic options 
with the vcs compiler.

The FSDB dumper will automatically load the correct dumper kernel library 
*libfsdb_core.so* from the sub-directory $VERDI_HOME points to and according 
to the VCS version and the platform you are running.

Alternatively, you can set the FSDB_DUMPER_PATH system environment variable to 
the full directory of a specific FSDB dumper (for example, in case you receive 
a patch dumper from Novas). For example,

`> setenv FSDB_DUMPER_PATH /tools/verdi/verdi2009.01/share/PLI/vcsd200606/LINUX`

The FSDB dumper will always load the dumper kernel library libfsdb_core.so from 
the directory FSDB_DUMPER_PATH points.


== Verdi version after 201001 ==

*NOTE*: A novas_dump.log file gets created during simulation to record some essential 
simulation/dumping information, such as simulation options used, environment variable 
settings, and Novas object directories linked. This log file is needed to report a new 
unified dumper related issue effectively.

=== VCS(2006.06 or Later Version) ===

For the VCS usage flow, the pli.a and coordinating novas.tab files need to be specified 
following the "*-P*" option. Before running the simulation (_simv_) the *LD_LIBRARY_PATH* 
environment variable must be set and point to the directory where the FSDB dumper engine 
(_libsscore__vcsXXX.so_) located. For example:

`> setenv NOVAS_INST_DIR /tools/verdi/verdi2010.01`
`> setenv LD_LIBRARY_PATH ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}share/PLI/VCS/${PLATFORM}`
`> setenv PLATFORM LINUX`

The directory containing the _novas.tab_ and _pli.a_ files is specified in *LD_LIBRARY_PATH*.

The table file _novas.tab_, contains the definitions of the FSDB dumping
commands.

The archive file _pli.a_, is the library file of the FSDB dumper.

The libsscore_vcsXXXX.so, located in ${NOVAS_INST_DIR}/share/PLI/lib/${PLATFORM}, 
is the FSDB dumper engine which will be automatically selected when running the simulation.

